.\" For nroff, turn off justification.  Always turn off hyphenation; it makes
.\" way too many mistakes in technical documents.
.hy 0
.if n .na
.\"
.TH QC--INTERP 1 "$ Date $"
.SH NAME
qc--interp \- The Quick C-- Interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "qc--interp"
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B "qc--interp"
is an interpreter for the C-- language.
The 
.B "arguments"
may be options or filenames.  All options are first processed
from left to right, and then all filenames (or 
.BR "-" ) 
are processed from
left to right.
.PP
Options begin with 
.B "-"
and are described below.
.PP
Files specified on the command line are expected to be Lua source files,
as appropriately produced by the Quick C-- compiler 
.IR "qc--" (1).
These files
(as well as the source code on stdin if the 
.B "-"
option is given) are loaded,
and the interpreter attempts to begin code execution at source procedure
.BR "main" .
.PP
Code execution continues until 
.B "main"
naturally returns, at which point
the interpreter exits.  If an error occurs, an appropriate message is displayed
and code execution halts.
.PP
If invoked with no 
.I "file"
argument and no 
.B "-"
option, 
.B "qc--interp"
enters 
interactive mode and waits for commands on stdin.  Please see below for a 
description of commands available in interactive mode.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "-h"
Summarize options to stdout and stop with exit code 0.  This option is 
incompatible with any other option.
.TP
.B "-v"
Raise verbosity level to high.  This causes the interpreter to output extra
runtime information to stdout.  Generally, this option should only be used to
debug a source file.
.TP 
.B "-"
Load source code on stdin as a file.  This option may be used in combination 
with filenames listed on the command line.  All files listed as well as the 
source code on stdin will be loaded into the interpreter.
.SH INTERACTIVE MODE
If no files are specified on the command line (and no 
.B "-"
option is given),
the interpreter enters interactive mode.
The interpreter presents the user with a 
.B ">"
prompt and awaits commands
on stdin.  The interpreter quits interactive mode when it receives a 
.B "quit"
command or 
.BR "EOF" .
.PP
The following commands are available in interactive mode:
.TP 
\fBload\fP [\fIfilename\fP] ...
Loads all filenames specified, in accordance with the given order (left to 
right).  Filenames must not be enclosed in quotes.
If a file fails to load properly, the interpreter stops command execution
and returns to the interactive mode prompt without attempting to load the
remaining specified files.
.TP 
\fBdisasm\fP [\fIlabel\fP] ...
Disassembles pre-loaded code associated with the exported C-- labels specified,
in left-to-right order.  The disassembled memory contents are dumped to
stdout in a somewhat readable format.
.TP 
\fBrun\fP \fIproc\fP [\fIarg...\fP]
Executes the code found at the procedure label specified 
.RI ( proc ), 
passing 
the given 
.I "arg"
as a parameter to the procedure.  It is a checked error for 
the label not to refer to an exported C-- procedure that has already been 
loaded into the interpreter.
.TP 
.B "verbosity"
Toggles verbosity level.  See above for command-line option 
.BR "-v" .
.TP 
\fBstacksize\fP \fIsize\fP
With no arguments, prints the interpreter's current stack size.  If a size
is given, the interpreter's stack size is reset to this size.
.TP 
.B "quit"
Quits interactive mode and exits the interpreter.
.PP
Multiple commands may be executed by separating them with a 
.B ";"
(semicolon).
.SH EXIT CODE
If 
.B "qc--interp"
is unable to recover from a load-time or run-time error,
it exits with exit code 1.  Otherwise, it exits with exit code 0.
.SH FILES
.TP 
.IB file .lua
Lua source code.
.SH SEE ALSO
http://www.cminusminus.org/,
http://www.lua.org/.
.PP
qc--(1), lua(1), qc--internals(1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to 
.BR bugs@cminusminus.org .
Include a 
.I "small"
example that
allows us to reproduce the bug. The bug tracking system can be found at
.BR http://www.cminusminus.org/qc--bugs .
