.TH QC--INTERNALS 1 "$ Date: $"
.\" For nroff, turn off justification.  Always turn off hyphenation; it makes
.\" way too many mistakes in technical documents.
.hy 0
.if n .na
.\"
.SH NAME
qc--internals \- customizing the Quick C-- compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBqc--\fP [\fIoption\fP | \fIfile\fP] ... 
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBqc--\fP is a compiler for the C-- language. It takes
.I files
as
arguments and compiles, assembles, and links the
.I files
into an
executable file.  The compiler is controlled by a built-in Lua
interpreter, running a Lua program. A user can manipulate the state of
the running interpreter or supply a new Lua program to customize
\fBqc--\fP.
.PP
A command-line option of the form \fIname\fP\fB=\fP\fIvalue\fP assigns \fIvalue\fP
to a variable
.I name
in the running interpreter. Both
.I name
and
.I value
must follow the Lua syntax for variables and values. If not
noted otherwise, the Lua type of a
.I value
is \fIstring\fP. As a
convention, capitalized names denote Lua tables. 
.PP
Caveat: the Lua code controlling
.B qc--
is in constant flux.  Anybody
dealing with options described here is assumed to know what he or she is
doing.
.SH OPTIONS
See the user's manual qc--(1) for more options.
.TP
\fBbackend=\fP\fIbackend\fP
\fBqc--\fP is a cross compiler; this option causes it to generate code for
\fIbackend\fP, where a
.I backend
identifies an architecture/operating
system platform. By default, code for the actual platform is generated.
The following targets of type 
\fIbackend\fP are supported:
.B Backend.x86 
(x86 running Linux),
.B Backend.sparc
(Sparc running Solaris),
and
.B Backend.ppc
(Power PC running Mac OSX).
.TP 
\fBDebug.stack=1\fP
Print diagnostic information about the composition of the stack frame.
.TP
\fBAs.path=\fP\fIpath\fP
Define an alternate path the assembler as(1). 
.TP 
\fBAs.options\fP=\fIoptions\fP
Define options passed to the assembler. 
.TP 
\fBLd.path=\fP\fIpath\fP
Define an alternate path for the linker ld(1).
.TP 
\fBLd.options\fP=\fIoptions\fP
Define options passed to the linker ld(1). Note that some other options
like
.B "-L"
and
.B "-l"
are also passed to the linker.
.TP 
\fBInterp.hashbang=\fP\fIstring\fP
An executable for the qc--interp(1) interpreter calls the interpreter
using the Unix #! mechanism. This option defines, what goes into the
first line of an executable. The default is 
.B #! /usr/bin/env qc--interp\fR.\fP
.TP 
\fBOptions.swap=1\fP
Treat each input program as if it has the opposite byte 
order from what is written in the source code.
.TP 
\fBOptions.validate=1\fP
Turn on validation that gives source-locations for C-- constructs that
may not be translatable for the target machine.
.TP
\fIname\fP\fB=\fP\fIvalue\fP
Assign Lua value
.I value
to the Lua variable \fIname\fP.
.TP 
\fB-e\fP \fIstatement\fP
The Lua
.I statement
is passed to the Lua interpreter and executed. This
allows to alter default settings in the interpreter or to inspect the
interpreter. 
.TP 
\fB-i\fP
Start an interactive session with the Lua interpreter that reads from
stdin. The session allows to inspect the Lua interpreter; most useful
for debugging Lua code. 
.TP 
\fB-vv\fP
Don't execute calls to external tools, just print them. Useful to test
the driver and new command line options.
.TP 
\fB-pp\fP
Pretty print: do not compile, assemble, or link. Each
.B file.c--
source
file is pretty printed into \fBfile.pp\fP. The
.B -o
option is honored.
.SH LUA STARTUP
The Lua interpreter built into
.B qc--
controls the compiler. At startup
it tries to find the file 
.B qc--.lua
using a search path taken from the
environment variable 
.BR QCMMLUAPATH .
If the environment variable is
undefined, the default is 
.BR ":.:*" .  
A search path contains a list of
colon separated directories. Two directory names are special: the empty
directory refers to an implementation-dependent system-wide directory,
like 
.BR /usr/local/lib/qc-- . 
The star 
.B "*"
refers to a ``directory''
that is actually compiled into the
.B qc--
executable.  With the default
search path (empty, dot, star),
.B qc--
therefore looks first in the
system-wide directory for \fBqc--.lua\fP, then in the current directory,
and then takes the built-in \fBqc--.lua\fP. 
.PP
To obtain a copy of the Lua startup script \fBqc--.lua\fP, use the
following option: \fB-e 'write(Boot["qc--.lua"])'\fP. When the default
search path is used, a (modified) copy of \fBqc--.lua\fP in the local
directory takes precedence over other built-in \fBqc--.lua\fP and thus can
be used for experiments.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 
QCMMLUAPATH
Search path for Lua code. If undefined, the default search path is
\fB:.:*\fP.
.TP 
QCDEBUG
Strings that can be set to debug the compiler.
For a list, run \fBqc-- -e 'Debug.explain()'\fP.
.SH SEE ALSO
http://www.cminusminus.org/,
http://www.lua.org/.
.br
qc--(1), qc--interp(1), lua(1), ld(1), as(1).
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to 
.BR bugs@cminusminus.org . 
Include a
.I small
example that
allows us to reproduce the bug. The bug-tracking system can be found at
.BR http://www.cminusminus.org/qc--bugs .
.SH AUTHORS
The good people at
.BR http://www.cminusminus.org .
.SH VERSION
 $Id$


